# Compilers
C++ is a language that has evolved much over the years, and this material explain many features added recently to the language. Therefore, in order to properly follow the tutorials, a recent compiler is needed. It shall support (even if only partially) the features introduced by the 2011 standard.
Many compiler vendors support the new features at different degrees. See the bottom of this page for some compilers that are known to support the features needed. Some of them are free!

## What is a compiler?
Computers understand only one language and that language consists of sets of instructions made of ones and zeros. This computer language is appropriately called machine language.
A single instruction to a computer could look like this:

```
00000 10011110
```

A particular computer's machine language program that allows a user to input two numbers, adds the two numbers together, and displays the total could include these machine code instructions:

```
00000 10011110
00001 11110100
00010 10011110
00011 11010100
00100 10111111
00101 00000000
```

As you can imagine, programming a computer directly in machine language using only ones and zeros is very tedious and error prone. To make programming easier, high level languages have been developed. High level programs also make it easier for programmers to inspect and understand each other's programs easier.
This is a portion of code written in C++ that accomplishes the exact same purpose:

```cpp
int a, b, sum;

cin >> a;
cin >> b;
             
sum = a + b;
cout << sum << endl;
```

Even if you cannot really understand the code above, you should be able to appreciate how much easier it will be to program in the C++ language as opposed to machine language.
Because a computer can only understand machine language and humans wish to write in high level languages high level languages have to be re-written (translated) into machine language at some point. This is done by special programs called compilers, interpreters, or assemblers that are built into the various programming applications.
C++ is designed to be a compiled language, meaning that it is generally translated into machine language that can be understood directly by the system, making the generated program highly efficient. For that, a set of tools are needed, known as the development toolchain, whose core are a compiler and its linker.